---
layout: page
title: ""
---

## Temperature fluctuations in the Lyman-&alpha; forest

[ADS link](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2019MNRAS.490.3177W/abstract)

The IGM follows a tight temperature-density relation if reionization is spatially uniform. However, patchy reionization leads to order unity scatter in the IGM temperature after its completion, which can persist for &Delta;z&sim;1-2. We studied how such temperature fluctuations change the shape of the Ly&alpha; forest flux power spectrum at z&sim;5, using a set of radiation-hydrodynamic simulations of reionization. The figure below summarizes our main findings. Points with error-bars show the observed power spectra, corrected to the resolution of our simulations. Each line is a power spectrum taken from a simulation. Solid lines represent radiative transfer (patchy reionization) simulations, where we simulated late-ending, early-ending, and extended reionization models. Dashed lines show flash reionization simulations where the whole simulation box is ionized at a given reionization redshift, which is the number following "FR-z". Large-scale coherent temperature fluctuations in the patchy reionization simulations result in large-scale excess power compared to the flash reionization simulations. The small-scale power, on the other hand, is mostly determined by the reionization midpoint, rather than inhomogeneities in the IGM temperature. By calculating a minimum &chi;<sup>2</sup> value for each of the simulated power spectra, we find that reionization models with reionization midpoints z>8 are disfavored by the data at 2.5&sigma; level, if we combine data from 3 redshift bins: 5.4, 5.0, 4.6. Future observations may be able to distinguish patchy vs uniform reionization models, if the measurements can be performed at lower k, or if the error-bars on the high-k power can be reduced by a factor of &sim;1.5.

{% include image.html url="powerspectrum.png" alt="Whoops! See Fig.4 of my paper." description="Power spectra of Ly&alpha; forest transmission fluctuations in different simulations." %}

Perhaps a more interesting take-away point from the figure above is the &#8818;20% difference in the small-scale power in all simulations, except the two very early reionization ones (ionized at z=10 and 12). This is surprising because our late reionization model produces a factor of &sim;1.5 higher gas temperatures than the early reionization one, so naturally we would expect the former to produce a larger small-scale exponential cut-off in power than the latter. The plot below illustrates that the reason why the hotter simulation does not show a larger small-scale suppression of power is the massive cancellation between thermal broadening and pressure smoothing effects. Red and blue lines represent two flash reionization simulations with very different reionization redshifts and gas temperatures, but the fractional differences between the two power spectra are &lt;30% on all scales. At z=5.4, there is almost no pressure smoothing in the hotter simulation because it is ionized at z=5.5. In the colder simulation ionized at z=10.5, more pressure smoothing suppresses small-scale power by &sim;50%, which largely cancels out the thermal broadening effects in the hotter simulation (compare with the green line, which is the power spectrum in the hotter simulation but with the gas put onto the temperature-density relation of the colder simulation). This degeneracy between pressure smoothing and thermal broadening is not studied in detail before, and appears in out more realistic IGM thermal histories.

{% include image.html url="pressuresmoothing.png" alt="Whoops! See Fig.7 of my paper." description="Effects of pressure smoothing cancelling thermal broadening in the power spectra of forest transmissions." %}

